    I would have to say that the second phase of the industrial revolution is the largest factor for new imperialism.
Certain nations where able to boost themselves up in wealth and military power at a pace that far outstretched every other.
Electricity is harnessed. Industrial nations had access to far more to light. With the light bulb, day and night almost becomes
a foreign concept. communication becomes incredibly long range. And eventually, the combustion engine would not only create
cars, but planes, ships, and tanks. Any other non industrial nation was hopeless to industrial imperialists.

    The second most important cause would have to be Extreme Nationalism. The ego of that the wealth and power from industrialization,
I would imagine, would feed into the idea that the nation is the best. Colonies where a sign of the nations success and dominance, 
and if the nation truly is the best, then they should get more colonies. Military budgets where humongous as a result and more
and more people would join the military. 

    The third most important cause is likely Social Darwinism. This perverted science would feed into extreme nationalism. The belief that a 
nation had a right to conquer merely through their ability to conquer might as well have been the same as the notion of the divine right of kings.
Darwin's discovery that life is plastic to the environment was one the most foundational discoveries in modern times. In his book
The Origins of the Species, he would outline this, and then later would describe how human's evolved from apes in The Decent of Man. 
Herbert Spencer would interpret this as a justification for dominance and colonialism. 

    The final important cause, I think, would be population pressure. People lives grew better tremendously. Public schools opened and hospitals where built. 
Birth rates where higher and life expectancy grew. More people who needed jobs and food and money. People's standards of living
went way up, and they would not want to go back to the way things where. Poverty would have to be outsourced. And colonialism would not only solve that problem,
but create jobs in the process, just by the sheer infrastructure of a colony, such as civil servants, missionaries, and soldiers.