1) Constitutionalism - The limitation of governments power by law (Supremacy of the law of the land).
    The law comes first, and the people second. Justification is that absolute power corrupts absolutely. 
    any constitution contains the basic principles and laws of the state. They determine the powers and duties of the government.
    This guarantees certain rights to the people. protect private property. Political blueprint on proper rule of the people.

    A) Constitution - 
        1) custom/ tradition
            A custom or tradition is a long established practice. These will be passed along from generation to generation. 
            Force the government to acknowledge the laws of the land.
        2) government accountability => system of checks and balances.
            Rulers can be tried for breaking the law. 

    B) main practical forms -
        1) Constitutional Monarchy
            => Hereditary ruler / Elected Officials
            Monarchs are considered head of state.
        2) Republic - political power comes exclusively from the voters. Earliest example is the United States.
            => Elected officials only

2) English Constitutional Monarchy - 
    A) roots
        1) Geography - Locations - whales scotland and ireland. North West of europe.
            A) Island Kingdom - england is separated from the rest of europe by the English Channel. Buffer zone.
            B) Semi-independence - The English, and later on the British, have a flexible foreign policy. 
        2) Common Law - (12th C.) - started under one of the most effective and powerful kings, Henry 2nd. 
            It's the law that is applied the same way throughout the kingdom. Monarchs pushed this. Canon law was church law.
            Same standards for all people/ uniform procedures, sentences, and punishments.

            A) Main Sources - Germanic law AND Roman law.
            B) Distinguishing Features - Germanic law is about strong local jurisdiction. In Roman law, it's about strong central jurisdiction.
                1) Trial by jury - Germanic
                2) Due process - Romanic - firmly established rules and procedures. 
                    If somebody in authority doesn't follow them, leads to unacceptable treatment of the accused. Unreasonable treatment.
                3) No double jeopardy. 
        3) Magna Carta - (1215) - Latin for great charter. - signed by King John. Forced to sign it. preamble and 63 clauses. Charter of liberties.
            The king is guarantees specific rights and privileges to the nobility. Eventually applies to all people,
            Formal limitation of royal power. Periodically, a common council
            of 25 barons where convene to check in. Ultimately, this document was used by varies monarchs. 

            A) Character of Liberties.
            B) Limitations of Royal Power
        4) Parliament - (14th C.) under Edward the 1st. Started as the mani advisory body to the monarch. It will then turn into what it is today,
            the supreme legislative body of England. Gains the ability to tax, and by which becomes self sustaining.

            A) House of Lords - Upper branch. Had to be part of nobility. This is the more influential early on.
            B) House of Commons - Lower house. Elected to the position. 

        B) Establishment - (Key Events)
            1) English Reformation - (1530)
                A) Henry the 8th (R. 1509 - 47)
                    1) 1st Marriage of Troubles
                        => Catherine of Aragon. Was married to Henry's brother. 
                    2) Papal Annulment issue
                        => Pope Clement VII. Refuses to grand him an annulment. Catherine is the aunt of charles the 5th, the most powerful man in europe.
                    3) English Church's Excommunication
                B) Key Long Terms Results - Changed how the church works. Pope was the head, the king of England of the Angolans Church. 
                    1) Growth of Protestantism
                    2) Social Instability

            2) English Civil War - (1642 - 1651)
                A) Stuart Dynasty - (1604 - 49/ 1660 - 1714)
                    * Scottish Royalty
                    1) James I - 1603 - 1625 -  stubborn. Had trouble with Parliament. People were saying we need to get of the Scottish.
                    2) Anti-stuart Rallying Points - 
                        A) Foreigners - Scottish. 
                        B) Religion => Puritanism or removal of Catholicism. James persecutes puritans.
                        C) Parliament - Found it tough to work with James. James is more monarchy-e. 
                    3) Charles I - (1625 - 1649) - dissolves parliament by 1629 - 1639 - asks parliament to afford scottish revolt.
                        Divides
                B) Open Fighting -
                    1) Opposing Sides
                        * Cavaliers (supports the king) vs roundheads (support parliament). Roundheads rally around long parliament.
                    2) New Model Army - made by parliament. Developed and ready by 1645. lead by Oliver Cromwell by the end of the civil war, which they win.
                        * Oliver Cromwell. Model Army made up of professional soldiers, made up of puritan troops. Cromwell was very puritan. 
                        * New Model Army captures the king, escapes, recaptured. Given ultimatum on parliament to split power, doesn't accept. Is executed.
                    3) Execution of Charles I
                        * Cromwell now needs to get to Scotland and Ireland and fixes 'em up.
                        * 1649, england will have a common wealth. Government exclusively by elected officials. Monarchy and house of lords abolished.
                        * Oligarchy. 
                        * Cromwell proposals himself leader of the Common Wealth. spring of 1663? sets up the Protectorate. Top position is Lord Protector.
                    4) Defeat of Charles II
                C) Results
                    1) House of Common's Control
                    2) Protectorate

            3) Glorious Revolution - (1688)
                A) Restoration of 1660
                    1) New Parliamentary Election - first time in 20 years, new  people are put in place.
                    2) Monarchy / House of Lords reestablished - Charles II crowned as king. Very popular initially. 
                    * Secretly out of revenge for the execution of his father. No male children made.
                    * had Cromwell's head chopped off posthumously.
                B) Bloodless Coup of 1688
                    1) Death of Charles II (1685)
                    2) Removal of James II
                    * james was one of the best admirals in the English navy. Had been married, but remarried. First married to a protestant and had a daughter,
                    who was co ruler in Holland?. Second wife is catholic. Opening trying to reestablish Catholicism.
                    * 1688 James has a son. Parliament asks his daughter to invade from Holland and get rid of James.
                    * William Orange and Mary (Jame's daughter) - had to sign a document:
                     * No going back to catholicism. * Recognize parliament as the supreme law making body. * freedom of speech.
                     * parliament has to meet regularly.
                    Constitutional Monarchy is solidified.
                C) Results - English Bill of Rights (1689)
                    1) Freedom of Worship - for all protestants. 
                    2) " " of speech - for all protestants
                    3) Right to bear arms - not for hunting or to catch criminals. For keeping government in line. protestants only.
                    4) habeas corpus - protection from arbitrary arrest. creation of search warrants.
                In 1689 the british isles are an upper class society. Starts to come down as the middle class grows in the 1800s. Lower class and women in 1900s.