                        Topic: Early Modern Absolutism

1) Absolutism
2) French Absolute Monarchy

1) Absolutism - complete control to run society is in the hands of a SINGLE individual or group.
    A) Absolute Monarchy - Ruled by a hereditary leader.
        * kind and queen emperor/empress
        1) creation of a strong central government
        2) promotion of ethnic identity

    B) strong supporting influences
        1) renaissance => strong central government
        2) rise of the middle ages => strong central government/ ethnicity
            protestant reformation => ethnicity 

    C) governing approach
        1) key ruling principle:
            divine right of king's theory
        2) key government agency:
            royal bureaucracy = their job to put into practice the wishes of the ruler. career official. salary
                Manage the royal budget, tax collect and spend.
                    sales taxes and tolls.
        3) key government protector - large portion of the budget.
            royal army + navy = started to become a career. Nobility supplied the officers and the peasants supplied the soldiers.
        4) strengths/ weaknesses
            strengths
                power to act.
                act with unity.
            weaknesses
                revolt only solution to fuck ups.

    D) main states = [france, spain, austria, russia, prussia]

2) French Absolute Monarchy. - model absolute kingdom of the early modern era
    A) Henry IV (NAVARRE) - (1553 - 1610) - born and raised a protestant. only about 10% of french were as such. 
            most french protestants lived in eastern france. A lot were calvinists. 
        * (R. 1589 - 1610) Bourbon Dynasty
        1) defeated the catholic holy league.
        2) catholic conversion.
            summer of 1593
        3) edict of nantes.
            spring of 1598. royal command. i recognize that most subjects are catholics, its the official state religion. but, where prots
            live in majority, they can worship as they please.
            full military and political rights. rights to arm.
            protestants are allowed to hold elected major or office. 
        4) economic stability.

    catholic extremist kills him. ambushed while driving.

    B) Cardinal Richelieve - (1585 - 1642)
        * 1st minister => 1629 - 1642
        1) main advised to louis XIII - born 1601 - 1643. the mother protect until adulthood. R. at 8. 
        2) Key domestic agendas
            A) anti-nobility
            B) anti-protestant
                one of the first things in 1629 after a major prot revolt was put down as to reduce the edict of nantes. 
                they could still worship. not more military or political rights.
        3) key foreign policy agenda. 
            => anti-hapsburg. spain and austria. 

    C) Cardinal Mazarin
        *1st minister 1643-1661
        1) main advisor to young Louis XIV
        2) highly unpopular figure
            A) continued Richelieve's Polices
            B) increased taxes (middle class)
            C) foreigner => italian
        3) Frondes - (1648 - 1653) french civil war
            A) common goal: weaken royal
                power / oust Mazarin
            B) Effect on young louis XIV
                * early years = full of instability

    D) Louis XIV - Sun King - icon of 20th century dictatorships
        * R. 1643 - 1715 = 71 year ruled
        1) Personality - temperament, ability, preference
            A) positive traits
                He was patient.
                observant
                charismatic
                int - not an intellectual, but was thoughtful?
                he's like Tom in terms of memory
                public persona, didn't show anger
            B) negative traits
                selfish
                demanding - Karen.
                suspicious - paranoid
                inflexible
        2) ruling style
            A) finesse - indirect measures of influences
                * close personal contact 
                    all high-ranking subordinates 
                    active social schedule - royal hunts, country outings, theatre, 
                    he had a favorite social setting - royal palace of Versailles - invites people on a regular basis
                * careful decision-making - 
                    A) usually avoided direct confrontations - 
                    B) direct access to information
                    C) never called in the estates general?
            B) force - direct measures of influences
                * censorship
                    information control - book banning. black list. 
                * conformity
                    1685 ended religious freedom for protestants (also hugonaughts). most of them from east france. 
                    too loud of a protest was treason. 


in absolutism - the individual is subordinate to the state
