1) Guiding Principles - focusing on human beings and the societies they live in. 
    * influential 18 century social and intellectual movement. 
    * used by it's supports because they thought it brought light to the dark corners of the mind.
    * "light" to them was rational thinking. "dark" chiefly was Christianity, being the main source of western irrationality. 
    * the idea that jesus was the son of god had to go.
    A) reason - the ability to think in a orderly manor. use only to try to figure out mysteries of the world.
        * to entitled thinkers, it is paramount. source of all knowable things.
        1) Logic - science of formal principles of reason.
        2) secularism - inference or rejection of all revealed religions.
    B) scientific method - collection of information through observations and experimentation. 
        1) natural world subjects
        2) human world subjects - studies that deal with human thoughts, desires and actions. 
            -according to human society has rational laws governing it. doesn't mature until the 19th century
            * rise of the social sciences
            A) Psychology - study of human mind and behavior at the individual level. 
            B) Sociology - study of human mind and behavior in GROUPS
            C) Anthropology - study of human origin.
            D) Economics - science of human business activity. study of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods. 
            * end result is steady human progress.

2) main supporters -
    A) Main Occupations - from the aristocracy/ nobility. upper middle class.
        1) Statesmen
        2) professors
        3) writers
        4) social reformers
        = well educated
        * enlightenment had almost no influence on the masses.
    B) Philosophe - secular thinkers. unrestrained critic. anti-establishment. Gather in small groups at peoples homes. reality based living.
        1) materialistic - interested in the physical world only.
        2) things they opposed
            A) superstition - believes or practices that results from fear of the unknown. 
            B) magic - witchcraft. my man said "sauce-ry". alchemists. 
            C) christian revelations - challenges the miracles and believes in the bible.
        3) things they promoted -
            A) religious - religious toleration. no official state religion. 
            B) social justice - equality under the law
            C) good government - a system that encourages the rational use of power. 
        * christians and entitlement agreed on individual was the building block of society and practice good morals.
    C) Early Influential figures
        1) sir issac newton -
            A) science's greatest man
            B) expert on natural world
        2) JOHN LOCKE - (1632 - 1704) - was exiled.
            * 1ST rate political /social theorist. 
            A) political theory -
                Two Treaties of Government, 1690 - does a comparison between absolutism and constitutionalism. - against divine right of kings theory. 
                => pro-democracy - pro WRITTEN constitution. 
                * pro human rights. "society should have a government in place that protects life liberty and property."
                * said the rulers violated the constitution they should be replaced. SHALL NOT. 
            B) social theory - empiricism means all knowledge comes from experience. 
                Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1689 - all about social and cultural traditions.
                => no original sin. at birth someone can do good things or bad things. depends on influence. 
            * Locke says childhood had the foremost influence on a person. 
            * Good parenting and access to a good education.

3) main periods
    A) early enlightenment - (1st half of the 18th century)
        * promote Deism - belief in natural religion - god the clock maker
    B) High Enlightenment - (2nd half of the 18th century)
        * Agnosticism - Stance on knowledge - david hume
        * Atheism - not theist.

4) Outstanding Figures -
    A) Voltaire - (1694 - 1778) - great intellectual - considered the most famous man in europe outside of a ruler. Celebrity Status.
        1) Ideal Philosophe - multi talented. historian. Political science. ethics. Wrote fiction. Pro Deism. political rebel.
        2) Essay on the Customs and Manners of Nations (1756) - Added culture to history study. 
            A) Cultural study
            B) Western/ Non-Wester study
    B) Baron Montesquieu - (1689 - 1755) - 
        1) French Aristocrat - becomes a Philosophe. not multi talented, but writes on one subject well. Political science.
            * Likes the english government system. Whats a parliament.
        2) Spirit of the Laws (1748) - The best kind of government is one with a balanced system to it to protect rights.
            * Checks and balances.
    C) Jean-Jacques Rousseau - (1712 - 1778)
        1) Swiss-born Philosophe - swiss has a french, italian, and german speaking parts.
            * goes to france and gets sponsored by some lady. Brilliant but unorthodox. Prolific writer. Wrote on philosophy, ethics, and political science.
        2) The Social Contract (1762) - pro democracy work. Agrees with Locke in a verbose constitution. 
            * Responsible to the will and needs of a government to response to the needs of the people
            => "The General Will" - When the majority changes, follow it and change it from the outside. Work within the system.
            * by the end of his life hes goes from using science and reason to romanticism. Considered an early romantic.

5) Romanticism - a reaction against the excessive use of reason.
    A) Heart/ Mind Approach. - every thought it charged with emotion. life should be lived with emotion, imagination, and enthusiasm. 
        * Feelings first, then reason giving form an direction. live a life of adventure. Feeling intellect. 
    B) Main Things They Opposed -
        1) Industrial Revolution - stifles individuality. 
        2) Middle Class Values - luck there's a family guy. First and foremost about social conformity. 
            * Business people can't understand art for art's sake. The artist are poet are the real leaders of society.
            * the artist or writer has a more sensitive soul.
    C) Main Things They Promoted - 
        1) organized religion - encouraged, though most were Christian or pantheist who sees god in nature.
        2) Nature => environmentalism - nature idealized. 
        3) Study of history - emphases on culture.
    D) Most Creative Field
        1) Poetry - british romantics - blake, lord byron, shelly, coleridge, victor hugo (not british).
        2) Music - Beethoven. List. Schubert. Middson. Vogner. 
    * according to romantics, proper education comes from the humanities.
    * Entitlement - mathematics, social sciences, physical science. 
