1) Paris Peace Conference of 1919
    A) Main Statesmen - "Big Four" - final decisions about the 4 central powers will lie with these.
        1) David Lloyd George - Prime Minister of Britain
        2) George Clemenceau - Prime Minister of France
        3) Vittorio Orlando - Prime Minister of Italy
        4) Woodrow Wilson - President of the USA
    B) Main Peace Proposals (approaches) - 
        1) Balance of Power approach
        => Congress of Vienna way -> 1815
            * Some support.
            * Main goal is to allow no one power to dominate the European continent.
            * British take the lead here
            * Punish the Germans, but do it moderately.
        2) Nationalistic approach 
            * Main goal is to severely punish the Germans.
            * There's a sentiment that Germany would do this.
            A) Human Loss - estimated that 40 million people died in WW1. Men women and children.
            B) Economic Loss - All the great powers lost a lot of money. A lot to pay back in terms of Taxes, bonds, ETC. Caused inflation.
                * The us makes gangbusters.
            C) Psychological Damage - The war produced anti-establishment intellectuals. Trust destroyed.
        3) Idealistic Approach - to create a community of power to avoid another World War. Wilson was all about it.
        => League of Nations - Creates rule for all countries to follow. Tries to negotiate to avoid war. Has power to sanction/ rally response.
    C) Final Peace Treaties - fairly harsh - they went with Nationalistic/ Idealistic combo
        * 4 defeated central powers
        1) Nationalistic Central Powers/ idealistic combo.
        2) Treat of Versailles - (Germany) - either sign or we invade. - don't want to sign, but Bismark says they have to.
            A) War Guilt Clause - Signing means 100% of the war is their fault.
            B) Lost German Territory - loses parts of Poland, which many leaders call home.
            C) Huge Reparations - 500 billion "marks?" Also having to paid in resources, and for a long time.
                * Mostly to France.
            D) Permanent Colonial Losses - Loses them all. France, Britain, and Japan divided them up.
            E) Weak Military - only 100,000 man army. And no tanks. 15k manned Navy, with no battleships. Engineless air force.
    D) Weimar Republic - (feb 1919) - Most germans will blame Weimar, and not the Kaiser, for the treaty of Versailles.
        1) Full Democratic Government. 
        2) Treaty of Versailles issue
        3) League of Nations issue





2) World Economic Crisis - (Great Depression) - world Economic crisis. Everywhere except the Soviet Union.
=> worst financial collapse of the industrial era. Started in the stock market in the US, and lasted in the US until Pearl Harbor.
    A) Main Causes - 
        1) Great War -> Tremendous Great Power debt - Colonies get expensive. Veterans, wounded or otherwise.
        2) Lost Russian Market -> Bolsheviks are a hostile anti capitalist regime.
        3) Weak German Market - 
            A) Reparations
            B) inflation - went from ~4 marks per US dollar, to 4.2 gigatribillion. 
            C) Reduced Market Size - can't get more buys to then make things.
        4) Mismanaged American Market - this is where it started.
        => Stock Market Crash 1929
            * American business leaders WAY over project.
            * didn't stink in until the following year.
    B) Maw Solutions -
        * Massive Unemployment
        1) Traditional Measures - Herbert Hover is elected president. The great engineer.
            A) Protectionism - Encourage your citizens to buy products in your country. Raise taxes on foreign goods.
            B) Balanced Budgets - The government spends less, scaling with less taxes. 
            C) Positive Thinking -  Constantly talk to your people saying everything gonna be alright. "Prosperity around the corner."
            D) Ineffective Responses - A, B, and C didn't do shit. 
                1) International economies - Not just about making products, but the service industry, such as retail and shipping/ receiving.
                2) Business paralysis - "Stand Pat" meaning hold still/ hold the line. 
                    * FDR says, "The only thing we have to fear, is fear itself."
        2) Keynesian Economics
            A) John Maynard Keynes - (1883 - 1846)
            B) Depression Solution.




3) Rise of Totalitarianism