    Medieval ideas about reality, such as those described by Aristotle, were very 
"human centric." Understandably as well, given observations were all they had to go on. 
Believing that there are "four main elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire" is very much what you 
would expect from the ego centric social primate that is the human race. 
A geocentric worldview is less about putting the Earth at the center of the universe, but us.
Looking at the human race as an outside, objective, and impartial observer was just didn't occur, 
and probably not all together obviously useful. 


    While the idea of a human centric worldview never really goes away, the pursuit of a better understanding
of reality lead to the scientific method, which eventually provides too much contradictory evidence 
to the idea of a geocentric worldview. The scientific method merely creates "models of predictability" 
which, given their reliance on experimentation, are incredibly impartial. Initially the overwhelming 
evidence for a heliocentric reality was resisted even by individuals like Tycho Brahe who went to great lengths 
recording the movements of celestial bodies from his observatory, eventually settling on a combination of 
geocentric and heliocentric ideas. His protege, Kepler, would eventually use Brahe's body of evidence and abandon 
any notion of geocentrism, making some of the most accurate initial discoveries about planetary orbits.


    Eventually, the pursuit of knowledge about reality via the scientific method would
lead to Galileo's "Sidereal Messenger" and "Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems,"
and finally, Newton's "Principia", which would cement much of our modern understanding reality. Even still, though,
after overwhelming contradiction to the idea of human importance, even Newton wasted the tail end of 
his life trying to accurately predict the Christian apocalypse depicted in the story of Revelations. 
I guess "fulfillments of the oldest, strongest, and most urgent wishes of mankind" where insurmountable
even for a genius like Newton.