1) Napoleon Bonaparte - (1769 - 1821)
    A) Corscian Nobility - They were not very wealthy.
    B) Military School - Artillery! KotB. Was the most progressive branch. Artillery is for smart people back then, lol.
    C) Excellent Officer - Supports revolutionaries during the revolution.
        1) Tactical Genius - rises up the ranks quickly. General by the moderate stage.
        2) Charismatic Personality - rare in political and military positions. 
        3) Tremendous Confidence - considered himself a man of destiny. Thought he was going to be a modern louis 14th.

2) Enlightened Despotism - 1800s - Enlightened because it's optimistic/ things should progress. His is difference from others.
    * One Great Rational Ruler in Charge *
    A) Main Features - Napoleonic Variety
        1) Talent based Society => Ability 1st / meritocracy - ability counted more than social class.
        2) Pro-Bourgeoisie (Middle Class)/ business people. Very different from Robespierre.
            => create a better standard of living
        3) Improve relations with the Catholic church.
        4) revamp legal and education system - law reflects hat he , education is pulled away from the church. Halilulya.
    B) Main Accomplishments - 
        1) Concordat of 1801 - between pope Pius 7th + Napoleon - 
            * a concordat is an agreement between the pope and state leader concerning religious matters. A negotiated settlement.
            * church was mad a clergymen that were killed or jailed. Wanted restitution.
            A) Catholicism => Majority Religion Status
            B) French Bishop Election Process - Napoleon would nominate people. The pope would choose one of the names.
            C) Compensation issue - clergy get salaries from government.
        2) Civil (Napoleonic) Code - civil code when it was put together. The law. Reflects the talent factor.
            A) All-encompassing nature - 
            B) progressive Features (for 1801) - everyone had the freedom to work. Freedom of worship. Solid protection for private property.
            C) traditional Features - 
                * unequal parenting relations - parents have authority over children.
                * unequal marriage relations - men have control over wife.
                * unequal work relations.
                    => Employer had complete control and authority over his employees. Owners/ boss call the shots with no worker interference.
            D) 1st modern police state - Legal code will heavily emphasize political and social conformity. forbids like protest/ no freedom of the press.
    C) Results - 
        1) 1802 => consul for life - vote for me to be consul for life. Takes the titles of 1st consul.
        2) 1804 => Emperor of France - pope crowns him, just like charlemagne. 

3) Grand Empire - (1805 - 1814)
    A) creation - (1805 - 1807)
        1) defeat of the 3rd coalition
            => series of smashing french victories over austria and russia.
        2) Main Reason for Frances Success -
            A) Superior leadership => Napoleon
            B) greater unity => nationalism
        3) tilsit treaty - (july 1807) 
            A) Russian Surrender
            B) Continued British Hostility
        4) Napoleonic Europe - redrawn map
            A) expand France
            B) dependent States
            C) Allies
            D) independent states
    B) Reforms - (1807 - 1814)
        1) Extension of the Civil Code - for dependent states and allies. Absolutism states didn't like it; they didn't ask for it, lol.
            * Civil Code means equality under the law.
            * He's trying to modernize things.
        2) Formation of the Continental System - aimed at promoting trade that hurts Britain. Low Tariffs to everyone besides Britain.
            A) Encouraged Member Trade - promote prosperity.
            B) Trade Embargo Against Britain 
                1) industrial revolution. Machine powered stuff.
                2) British smugglers. Sanctioned by Britain.
                3) Non european trade. America, India, you name it.
            C) Results
                1) increased unpopularity outside of France.
                2) drained manpower and resources.
    C) Destruction - (1812 - 1814)
        1) Hostile British relations - british support any anti Napoleon.
        2) Poor Russian relations
            A) Grand Duchy of Warsaw (New Polish State) - Napoleon created it. 
            B) Open Violation of the Continental System - Russia lets britain trade with it.
        3) Russian Invasion of 1812 - best troops are his french troops/ the grand army. But the army is made up of allies and dependent states.
            A) Russian retreat - organized retreat. Too cold. Scorched Earth. Make the land unlivable on the way back. Poison well, kill livestock.
                * big open battle just before Moscow, fought to a draw. Battle of Borodino. 
            B) Capture Moscow - Moscow is abandoned.
            C) French retreat - it's shitty. loses a lot of troops.
            D) Result - 
                1) crippled Grand Army. Most of his veteran troops are dead, wounded, or scourged.
                2) 4th coalition is formed against him. Britain, Russia, Austria, Prussia.
                3) Fall in march, 1814. Leipzig, german cities, he gets fucked. Captured and shipped off to Elba.

4) Congress of Vienna - (october 1814 - June 1815) - Vienna is the capital of Austria.
    A) Main Statesmen - decision makers, 4 from the 4th coalition and 1 from france.
    B) Initial Peace Settlement -
        * Goal: Preserve the old order
        * Guiding Principle: Balance of Power Principle. - No one power should dominate the continent of europe.
        1) Treaty of Paris - (1814)
            A) Borders - france keeps all its own thingy
            B) Colonies - france gets is colonies back.
        2) Additional Conditions - Vienna
            A) Government of france is restructured. France becomes a constitutionals monarchy. Louis the somethings becomes Monarch.
            B) No War Reparations - didn't have to pay shit for losing.
    C) Battle of Waterloo => Return of Napoleon. Spring of 1815. Belgium. Actually close but is defeated. Sent to St. Helena off of Africa. 
        * 6 years after he dies. Was poisoned with small doses of arsenic.
    D) Final Peace Settlement -
        1) Retained Conditions
        2) Changed some of the border line crossing and had to pay reparations. France has to pay for 4th coalition troops in france.