Modern European colonialism - greatest one ever
    Mid - 15th century to late 20th century
    New imperialism from 1871 when germany was formed until 1914, the start of ww1
    Made possible by 19th century technology Ends up being a final burst of colonialism because of this
    a) Weaponry: Longer range repeating rifles. Also Machine guns. long range artillery.
    b) transportation: steam powered equipment and ships. Eventually the internal combustion engine. Then airplane.
    c) communication: Telegraph to communicate. Wireless communication eventually. Mark Coney. 
    d) medicine: allows for colonialism. Germ theory. Quninde for malaria. Pasteurization for milk. Ether (pain killer) for operations.
    reasons of colonialism: Doing it for civilization. some people practiced cannibalism and human sacrifice. 
        create order, which would increase trade and productivity, as well as spread christianity. 

western is going to include the US and Japan at this point.

1) Main Causes -
    A) Extreme Nationalism - my country, right or wrong. This way of thinking dominates the educated elites. Tolerated.
        1) Colonies = Sources of National Pride. Gonna gain or add to colonies to be awesome.
            A) Large Military Budgets - more peopler serving in the military. Be it the army or navy.
            B) Improved Weapons Technology.
        2) Broad Popular Support - there was, but it wasn't deep. But it had to be at a minimal loss of life.
    B) Social Darwinism - competition in human society produces the survival of the fittest, and that benefits society as a whole.
        => came about as a combo of genetics and evolution. 
        1) Charles Darwin - (1809 - 1882)
            => The Origins of Species (1859) - the plant or animal that adapts best to it's environment will be the one that survives over time.
            => the decent of man. Humans evolved from apes.
        2) Herbert Spencer - (1820-1893) note 2
            => The Study of Sociology (1873) - coined the term survival of the fittest. Justifies colonialism.
    C) Industrial Revolution - 2nd phase - 1850 - 1914. "Great Power" dominated. 
        6 great powers in europe + the US and Japan.
        * 1st Phase => British Dominated
        1) New Power Sources - steam dominated the 1st phase, but for the 2nd...
            A) Electricity - Lighting, Motors, and communication. The most important power ever.
            B) Internal Combustion Engine - automobiles, airplanes, and ships.
            new industries:
                * britain would be slow to the draw.
                * steel industry, oil field. chemical field.
        2) Sharp Economic competition - Britain goes to number 3 behind US and Germany.
            => Manufacturing Growth
                = Colonial Growth
    D) Population Pressure - higher standard of living is demanded. Gotta make more shit.
        1) Higher Birth Rates / Longer Life Expectancy - Population explosion. 
            * Life expectancy was about 40 everywhere. Usually men outlive women. Now its 50 and women start outliving men.
            * Everyone is going to expect better. Rise of the modern day public school system and hospital system. These things EXPLODE.
        2) Greater Employment Challenges -
            A) American Immigration
            B) Colonial Jobs - military, civil servants like the governor and his staff (beurocats), private industry, missionary. 

2) Chief Colonial Areas.
    A) India - opened to western influence in the early-16th century.
        1) Portuguese Activities
        2) Dutch Activities then takes that away.
        3) British / French Activities then squeezed them out.
            * 7(seven) year war (1756 - 63)
                => south asian results, french is gets squeezed out by Britain.
        4) British Rule - (1763 - 1947)
            A) East India Company (BEIC) - company given monopoly over India.
                * British Civil Service
                * Friendly India Princes
                * Sepoy Armies - indian troops trained and supplied by the British.
            B) Great Rebellion (Sepoy Mutiny) - major northern india prince revolting. 
                * cultural and religious differences. Christianization didn't go well here. 
                    The British pressured indians to pass a law saying that a hindu tradition where women are burned to death with their husband is bad.
                => 1857 - 58 - initially successful, but victors fight amongst themselves and are uncoordinated.
                1) Massive Route
                2) British Victory
            C) India Act of 1858- india becomes a crown colony
                1) Crown Colony - british government directly runs it.
                2) non-british impact - 
                    * three new imperial powers, italy, germany, japan. they adapt this kind of colonialism.

    B) China - Opened to western influence in the earth 16th century. (1510)
        1) Portuguese => Macao
            A) Restricted trade - Chinese viewed them as barbarians.
            B) Steady Chinese Decline compared to the western
                China even had a great iron manufacturing sector before the world, but the central government shuts it down so the little people don't 
                get power. 
                Cause China to fall behind.
                => "middle kingdom" - believe that China was the center of human activity.
        2) British -
            A) 1st Opium War (1939 - 1842)
                * Lasts 3 years. exposes china as weak compared to industrial nations.
                * British selling opium in China. Drug epidemic.
                * chinese government tries to crack down by telling them to just arrest anyone who is involved in opium trade.
                * chinese government confiscate british property. Britain demands it return their product.
                * Britain invades the coast an humiliates the Chinese.
                => British Defeat China
            B) Treat of Nanking (1842)
                * summer of 1842
                1) chinese government agrees to pay reparations. The bill is huge, 20 million dollars.
                2) low tariff rates. British actually set the rates.
                3) Un equal treaty system is put in place. 5 chinese cities are designated free trade zones. No tariffs there.
                4) British subjects who break Chinese law is tried in a British court. Diplomatic immunity for merchants and the like.
                    * This was due to barbaric punishments.
                4 again) Hong Kong becomes a permanent british possession.
                * 1842 - 1945, China was an imperial area of western Colonial expansion. 
                * chinese consider it the "century of shame."
                    * second opium war / boxer Rebellion. all lost.
            C) Africa - Opened to western influence in the mid-15th century (1430's)
                1) Portuguese Activities
                    * Atlantic African Slave trade
                2) Direct European Control -
                    A) 1880 - 10% of the continent
                    B) 1914 - All of the continent expect Ethiopia + Liberia.

3) Japan - opened to western influence starting in the mid 16th century (1540's)
    Japanese are far more smitten to western technology.
    A) Portuguese
        1) Chinese Escorts
        2) Social Problems => christianity
            * warlords shut down missionaries by kicking them out. Japanese Christians are told convert or die.
                * warlords tell the west than can still trade but on the coast. Causes Japan to fall way behind.
    B) Westernization Process -
        1) American Opening (1853) - The US uses Japan as a hub to trade with China.
            * US sends a fleet of merchant ships and war ships. 
            => Commodore Matthew C Perry. The US tell him to go there with all this and negotiate with warlords.
                * if they don't accept terms, show force.
        2) Meiji Restorations - (1868) -  trying to avoid being swallowed up by the war.
            A) Revived Strong Central government 
                * step one is defeat all the warlords. Central Government defeat the samurai.
                * emperor technically share power with parliament. Emulate Britain.
            B) Strong Industrial Base
                * Japan lacks a lot of the natural resources they need however, and expand into Korea.
                * Japan will fight two wars of expansion. with Korea and China. 1894 with China. Win in a single year.
                * Russia starts blocking Japan. In 1904 Japan and Russia goes to war. 
                    * Japan is hella prepaid. Purchases shipped and copied Militaries and markets from around the world.
                    * Japan attacks without warning, crushes beach head, and moves up into Russia. 
                    * Russia sends and entire fleet all the way from europe to Japan and Japan crushes it.
                    * Japan wins! But takes Korea.
                        * Roosevelt negotiates the peace treaty. Sets up rivalry with the US.


